MTM-60162 Messaging Management user docs (#2982)
SoftwareAG/c8y-docs: content/standard-tenant/monitoring-bundle/messaging-service.md

---
weight: 20
title: Messaging Service
layout: bundle
outputs:
  - html
  - json
sector:
  - platform_administration
helpcontent:
  - label: messaging-service
    title: Messaging Service
    content: "Monitor the Messaging Service resources. Track resource usage like topics, subscribers, and backlogs for features such as Notifications 2.0 and the MQTT Service. Select features and topics to view detailed statistics, check limits, and identify potential bottlenecks or inactive consumers."
---

> The **Messaging Service** is a [publish/subscribe messaging](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publish%E2%80%93subscribe_pattern) and message streaming component embedded within the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Messaging Service** is a [publish/subscribe messaging](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publish%E2%80%93subscribe_pattern) and message streaming component embedded in the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} platform.
```

It provides asynchronous communication between platform components and user-facing features for moving real-time data into and out of the platform.

> The features that use the Messaging Service include the microservice-based Data broker, Notifications 2.0, and the MQTT Service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The features that use the Messaging Service include the microservice-based data broker, Notifications 2.0, and the MQTT Service.
```

> **Topics** are the core concept underlying all of the features using the Messaging Service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Topics are the core concept underlying all of the features using the Messaging Service.
```

> A topic is a called a logical channel for delivering messages from publishers to subscribers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A topic is a logical channel for delivering messages from publishers to subscribers.
```

Reviewer 3: Done

> A topic is a named logical channel for delivering messages from *publishers* to *subscribers*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A topic is a called a logical channel for delivering messages from publishers to subscribers.
```

> Each topic may have any number of publishers and subscribers, and in general, every subscriber will receive the messages sent by every publisher.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each topic may have any number of publishers and subscribers, and in general, every subscriber receives the messages sent by every publisher.
```

> All of the subscribers on a topic will receive the published messages in the same order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All subscribers of a topic receive the published messages in the same order.
```

> The topic will persistently store published messages until every subscriber has acknowledged that it has successfully received them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The topic persistently stores published messages until every subscriber has acknowledged that they have successfully received them.
```

This means that the Messaging Service can guarantee the delivery of every published message to every subscriber.

The following sections show how to monitor your tenant's usage of the Messaging Service for each of the services that use it.

> ### To view the topics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### To view the topics {#to-view-the-topics}
```

> Click **Messaging Service** in the **Monitoring** menu in the navigator to display a list of all features that are using the Messaging Service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Messaging Service** in the **Monitoring** menu in the navigator to display a list of all features that use the Messaging Service.
```

> Next to the feature name, you will also see basic information about the feature's usage of the Messaging Service, such as the number of topics, publishers, and subscribers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next to the feature name, you see basic information on the feature's usage of the Messaging Service, such as the number of topics, publishers, and subscribers.
```

> Select a feature and click on it to see more details. This will display a list of all topics used by the feature and the limits that are applied for each of those topics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select a feature and click it to see the details. This displays a list of all topics used by the feature and the limits that are applied for each of these topics.
```

![Messaging Management Topics](/images/users-guide/Administration/messaging-management-topics.png)

> #### Topics list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Topic list {#topic-list}
```

> The topics list shows the following information for each topic:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The topic list shows the following information for each topic:
```

| Message rate out (msg/s) | Total rate of messages dispatched to the subscribers for the topic per second. Dispatch includes additional batching and queuing mechanisms, so this rate could differ from the subscriber acknowledgment rate. | -               |
| Subscribers              | Total number of registered subscribers. This includes both actively consuming subscribers and those that are currently disconnected and not consuming any messages.                                             | > 5             |
| Message backlog          | Backlog size in bytes which corresponds to the size occupied by unconsumed messages.                                                                                                                            | > 20 MB         |
| Used backlog             | Percentage usage of the backlog quota limit.                                                                                                                                                                    | > 80%           |

> Please refer to the feature-specific documentation below for more information on how to map the topic name to the source and how to clear the backlog when reaching the alarm threshold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the feature-specific documentation below for more information on how to map the topic name to the source and how to clear the backlog when reaching the alarm threshold.
```

> #### Messaging Service limits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Messaging Service limits {#messaging-service-limits}
```

All the backlog limits visible at the top of the topics list view are applied per topic. This means if the backlog quota is set to 25MB, each topic will queue messages until it reaches the configured limit.
Limits are {{< product-c8y-iot >}} platform wide, and only the Operations team can change them.

> ### To view the topic details

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### To view the topic details {#to-view-the-topics-details}
```

Click on a selected topic name to navigate to the topic details view.
The view contains information about the topic at the top and the list of all subscribers for that topic below.

![Messaging Management Topic Details](/images/users-guide/Administration/messaging-management-topic-details.png)

> #### Subscribers list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Subscriber list {#subscriber-list}
```

> The subscribers list shows the following information for each subscriber:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The subscriber list shows the following information for each subscriber:
```

| Name                        | Subscriber name. See the feature-specific documentation below for more information on mapping this to a specific destination. | -               |
| Connected clients           | Number of clients that are currently connected and consuming messages.                                                        | -               |
| Acknowledgment rate (msg/s) | Current rate per second of messages fully processed (consumed, processed, and acknowledged) by the consumers.                 | -               |
| Last acknowledged           | Latest timestamp when a message was fully processed by the consumer.                                                          | >= 1 day        |
| Unacknowledged messages     | Number of unconsumed messages for this subscriber.                                                                            | > 1000          |
| Used backlog                | Percentage usage of the backlog quota limit by the subscriber.                                                                | > 80%           |

> Please refer to the feature-specific documentation below for more information on how to map the subscriber name to the destination and how to clear the backlog when reaching the alarm threshold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the feature-specific documentation below for more information on how to map the subscriber name to the destination and how to clear the backlog when reaching the alarm threshold.
```

### Monitoring Notifications 2.0 {#monitoring-notifications-2.0}

> #### Topic and subscriber

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Topic and subscriber {#notifications-topic-and-subscriber}
```

The subscriber name is the same as the `subscriber` field used in the [Notifications 2.0 Tokens API](https://{{< domain-c8y >}}/api/core/#operation/postNotificationTokenResource).

The subscriber is created the first time that a Notifications 2.0 WebSocket connection is established using a token with given subscription and subscriber names.
The topic itself is created the first time that _any_ Notifications 2.0 WebSocket connection is established using a token with the given subscription name.
However, once the subscriber is created it will not be deleted even if the WebSocket connection is disconnected.
That is, the Messaging Service will collect and persist the messages under the given topic until either they are consumed, they reach the configured time-to-live (TTL) interval, or the [subscriber is explicitly unsubscribed](https://{{< domain-c8y >}}/api/core/#operation/postNotificationTokenUnsubscribeResource) from the topic.

> Please refer to the [Consumer lifecycle](https://{{< domain-c8y >}}/api/core/#section/Overview/Consumer-lifecycle) for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the [consumer lifecycle](https://{{< domain-c8y >}}/api/core/#section/Overview/Consumer-lifecycle) for more details.
```

> #### Clearing the backlog

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Clearing the backlog {#notifications-clearing-the-backlog}
```

> There are a few ways to clear the backlog from Notifications 2.0 topics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are various ways to clear the backlog from Notifications 2.0 topics.
```

> ##### Consume messages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Consume messages {#notifications-consume-messages}
```

If the subscriber is not needed anymore and there are no valuable messages that should be consumed, the subscriber can be unsubscribed.
To do this:
* Create the [Notifications 2.0 Token](https://{{< domain-c8y >}}/api/core/#operation/postNotificationTokenResource) for the selected topic and subscriber.
* Use the token to unsubscribe the subscriber from the topic by calling the [Notifications 2.0 Token Unsubscribe API](https://{{< domain-c8y >}}/api/core/#operation/postNotificationTokenUnsubscribeResource).

This will remove the subscriber from the Messaging Service and clear the backlog for the given subscriber, and potentially the whole topic if there are no more subscribers with unconsumed messages.
If the subscriber is not recreated by establishing a [Notifications 2.0 WebSocket connection](https://{{< domain-c8y >}}/api/core/#section/Consumer-protocol) to the topic, this action is permanent, meaning the backlog won't grow again.
If there are no more active subscribers for the topic, it is also recommended to delete the [Notifications 2.0 Subscription](https://{{< domain-c8y >}}/api/core/#operation/deleteNotificationSubscriptionResource).

> ##### Unsubscribe the subscriber from the Messaging Management View

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Unsubscribe the subscriber via the UI {#notifications-unsubscribe-the-subscriber-via-the-UI}
```

> If the subscriber is not needed anymore and there are no valuable messages that should be consumed, the subscriber can be unsubscribed directly from the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the subscriber is no longer needed and there are no valuable messages that should be consumed, the subscriber can be unsubscribed directly from the UI.
```

> To do this, select the subscriber from the subscriber list in the Messaging Service view and click the unsubscribe icon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, select the subscriber from the subscriber list in the **Messaging Service** page and click the unsubscribe icon.
```

This action is equivalent to [unsubscribing the subscriber using Notifications 2.0 API](#unsubscribe-the-subscriber-using-notifications-2.0-api).

> All the information about this being a permanent action and clearing the backlog is the same as described above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All information about this being a permanent action and clearing the backlog is the same as described above.
```

### Monitoring the MQTT Service {#monitoring-the-mqtt-service}

> #### Topic and subscriber

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Topic and subscriber {#mqtt-service-topic-and-subscriber}
```

The topic name is mapped 1:1 to the topic name used by the MQTT Service client.

> When working with the [MQTT Service SDK]({{< link-c8y-github >}}/cumulocity-clients-java/blob/develop/mqtt-service), the subscriber name is the same as the name defined in the [subscriber config]({{< link-c8y-github >}}/cumulocity-clients-java/blob/develop/mqtt-service/websocket/src/main/java/com/cumulocity/mqtt/service/sdk/subscriber/SubscriberConfig.java#L56).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When working with the [MQTT Service SDK]({{< link-c8y-github >}}/cumulocity-clients-java/blob/develop/mqtt-service), the subscriber name is the same as the name defined in the [subscriber configuration]({{< link-c8y-github >}}/cumulocity-clients-java/blob/develop/mqtt-service/websocket/src/main/java/com/cumulocity/mqtt/service/sdk/subscriber/SubscriberConfig.java#L56).
```

Subscribers created by MQTT clients are deleted automatically once the client disconnects, so it is unlikely that they will persist for a long time and require manual cleanup.

> #### Clearing the backlog

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Clearing the backlog {#mqtt-service-clearing-the-backlog}
```

> There are a few ways to clear the backlog from MQTT Service topics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are various ways to clear the backlog from MQTT Service topics.
```

> ##### Consume messages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Consume messages {#mqtt-service-consume-messages}
```

If the topic and subscriber were created, there are probably also valuable messages stored in the Messaging Service that should be consumed.
Use the [MQTT Service SDK]({{< link-c8y-github >}}/cumulocity-examples/blob/develop/mqtt-service-examples) to consume and acknowledge the messages for a given topic and subscriber.

> After consuming all the messages, the backlog will be cleared, and the topic will be ready to store new messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After consuming all the messages, the backlog is cleared, and the topic is ready to store new messages.
```

> ##### Unsubscribe the subscriber using MQTT Service SDK {#unsubscribe-the-subscriber-using-mqtt-service-sdk}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Unsubscribe the subscriber using the MQTT Service SDK {#unsubscribe-the-subscriber-using-mqtt-service-sdk}
```

> If the subscriber is not needed anymore and there are no valuable messages that should be consumed, the subscriber can be unsubscribed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the subscriber is no longer needed and there are no valuable messages that should be consumed, the subscriber can be unsubscribed.
```

Use the [unsubscribe action]({{< link-c8y-github >}}/cumulocity-clients-java/blob/develop/mqtt-service/websocket/src/main/java/com/cumulocity/mqtt/service/sdk/websocket/WebSocketSubscriber.java#L60) from the MQTT Service SDK.
This will remove the subscriber from the Messaging Service and clear the backlog for the given subscriber, and potentially the whole topic if there are no more subscribers with unconsumed messages.

> ##### Unsubscribe the subscriber from the Messaging Management View

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Unsubscribe the subscriber via the UI {#mqtt-service-unsubscribe-the-subscriber-via-the-ui}
```

> If the subscriber is not needed anymore and there are no valuable messages that should be consumed, the subscriber can be unsubscribed directly from the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the subscriber is no longer needed and there are no valuable messages that should be consumed, the subscriber can be unsubscribed directly from the UI.
```

> To do this, select the subscriber from the subscriber list in the Messaging Service view and click the unsubscribe icon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, select the subscriber from the subscriber list in the **Messaging Service** page and click the unsubscribe icon.
```

> This action is equivalent to [unsubscribing the subscriber using MQTT Service SDK](#unsubscribe-the-subscriber-using-mqtt-service-sdk).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This action is equivalent to [unsubscribing the subscriber using the MQTT Service SDK](#unsubscribe-the-subscriber-using-mqtt-service-sdk).
```

> ### Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) {#monitoring-mqtt-service-faq}
```

#### What happens when the backlog is full?

When the Messaging Service backlog is full, no new messages can be added to the backlog until it is cleared.

> This may result in requests being rejected or other unexpected behaviors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This may result in requests being rejected or other unexpected behavior.
```

> Please clear the backlog before continuing work with the Messaging Service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clear the backlog before continuing work with the Messaging Service.
```

> When the Messaging Service backlog is full, no new messages can be added to the backlog until it is cleared.

Reviewer 4: We should add 'The publisher will receive an error ...... and should be able to handle the error in an appropriate manner' or words to that effect.

Reviewer 3: I don't want to say publisher, as in our case it is usually implicit and it depends on the feature. For Notifications 2.0 this will be a REST request ending with 500, for the MQTT Service, MQTT client will be disconnected (in version 3) or it will receive an error (version 5).
If we would like to have more details here, we must split this into two and describe it differently per feature or leave it as it is with generic `requests being rejected`. @scmi-c8y what do you think?

Reviewer 3: Discussed with @scmi-c8y, I will describe this in more detail in both MQTT/Notification sections.

Reviewer 3: I extended the `Clearing the backlog` section and put all the details there. Please take a look to see if it makes more sense right now.

Author: @JanePorter this was the review I mentioned yesterday, if you could take a look at Slawek's changes and give your thoughts that would be great.

#### What should I do when encountering a high number of topics?

A high number of topics could be normal behavior when dealing with many devices, but there could also be a situation where new topics are generated unnecessarily:
* Test topics that were never cleared - check for unused topics that can be cleaned up.
* Topics carrying the same data - topic names should be reused where possible to avoid unnecessary resource consumption. If you have multiple topics carrying the same data, consider merging them into a single topic.

#### What should I do when encountering a high number of subscribers?

> If you have a single microservice or a single client consuming messages from the Messaging Service, you should typically have only a single subscriber.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a single microservice or a single client consuming messages from the Messaging Service, you should typically only have a single subscriber.
```

To do this, select the subscriber from the subscriber list in the **Messaging Service** page and click the unsubscribe icon.
This action is equivalent to [unsubscribing the subscriber using Notifications 2.0 API](#unsubscribe-the-subscriber-using-notifications-2.0-api).
All information about this being a permanent action and clearing the backlog is the same as described above.

### Monitoring the MQTT Service {#monitoring-the-mqtt-service}

#### Topic and subscriber {#mqtt-service-topic-and-subscriber}

The topic name is mapped 1:1 to the topic name used by the MQTT Service client.

When working with the [MQTT Service SDK]({{< link-c8y-github >}}/cumulocity-clients-java/blob/develop/mqtt-service), the subscriber name is the same as the name defined in the [subscriber configuration]({{< link-c8y-github >}}/cumulocity-clients-java/blob/develop/mqtt-service/websocket/src/main/java/com/cumulocity/mqtt/service/sdk/subscriber/SubscriberConfig.java#L56).

Subscribers created by MQTT clients are deleted automatically once the client disconnects, so it is unlikely that they will persist for a long time and require manual cleanup.

> #### Clearing the backlog {#mqtt-service-clearing-the-backlog}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Clear the backlog {#mqtt-service-clearing-the-backlog}
```

That would be more consistent with the other headings

---
weight: 20
title: Messaging Service
layout: bundle
outputs:
  - html
  - json
sector:
  - platform_administration
helpcontent:
  - label: messaging-service
    title: Messaging Service
    content: "Monitor the Messaging Service resources. Track resource usage like topics, subscribers, and backlogs for features such as Notifications 2.0 and the MQTT Service. Select features and topics to view detailed statistics, check limits, and identify potential bottlenecks or inactive consumers."
---

{{< c8y-admon-preview >}}
This feature is in **Public Preview** status, that is, it is not enabled by default and may be subject to change in the future.

> The feature can be enabled for your tenant using the **Manage beta features** option on the user menu in the **Administration** application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The feature can be enabled for your tenant using the **Manage preview features** option in the right drawer in the **Administration** application.
```

Reviewer: Will be renamed (or has already been done).

{{< /c8y-admon-preview >}}

The **Messaging Service** is a [publish/subscribe messaging](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publish%E2%80%93subscribe_pattern) and message streaming component embedded in the {{< product-c8y-iot >}} platform.
It provides asynchronous communication between platform components and user-facing features for moving real-time data into and out of the platform.
The features that use the Messaging Service include the microservice-based data broker, Notifications 2.0, and the MQTT Service.

Topics are the core concept underlying all of the features using the Messaging Service.
A topic is a logical channel for delivering messages from publishers to subscribers.

> Each topic may have any number of publishers and subscribers, and in general, every subscriber receives the messages sent by every publisher.

Reviewer 4: Hi @schmiel-cumulocity the statement 'and in general, every subscriber receives the messages sent by every publisher' could be misunderstood to be much more general that it is.  Do you think we should add clarification, just to be absolutely sure, eg. and in general, every subscriber to a topic receives the messages sent by every publisher to that topic.?

Reviewer 3: You are right. Adding `topic` makes it much cleaner, so no one can take it as a "generic" broadcaster. Change applied.

| Message rate out (msg/s) | Total rate of messages dispatched to the subscribers for the topic per second. Dispatch includes additional batching and queuing mechanisms, so this rate could differ from the subscriber acknowledgment rate. | -               |
| Subscribers              | Total number of registered subscribers. This includes both actively consuming subscribers and those that are currently disconnected and not consuming any messages.                                             | > 5             |
| Message backlog          | Backlog size in bytes which corresponds to the size occupied by unconsumed messages.                                                                                                                            | > 20 MB         |
| Used backlog             | Percentage usage of the backlog quota limit.                                                                                                                                                                    | > 80%           |

> Refer to the feature-specific documentation below for more information on how to map the topic name to the source and how to clear the backlog when reaching the alarm threshold.

Reviewer 5: Not sure about using the term "alarm threshold", it might be understood as if an alarm is created in the platform when value reaches it, but it's not the case yet, is it? It's more like an info when a user should take closer look at the topic, right?

Reviewer 3: Good point, changed to `Unsafe range`

| Name                        | Subscriber name. See the feature-specific documentation below for more information on mapping this to a specific destination. | -               |
| Connected clients           | Number of clients that are currently connected and consuming messages.                                                        | -               |
| Acknowledgment rate (msg/s) | Current rate per second of messages fully processed (consumed, processed, and acknowledged) by the consumers.                 | -               |
| Last acknowledged           | Latest timestamp when a message was fully processed by the consumer.                                                          | >= 1 day        |
| Unacknowledged messages     | Number of unconsumed messages for this subscriber.                                                                            | > 1000          |
| Used backlog                | Percentage usage of the backlog quota limit by the subscriber.                                                                | > 80%           |

> Refer to the feature-specific documentation below for more information on how to map the subscriber name to the destination and how to clear the backlog when reaching the alarm threshold.

Reviewer 5: Similar issue with "alarm threshold".
